lib/viewmodel/spec.md, before:

Mutations
=========

match model - viewmodel - view  defs/attributes/events/actions/

- run over existing observable, find/create match, sync
    - matching for model and view model will be (very) lazy
        - just add listener for changes
        - wait for mach requests from the view 
    - if no match found, register it to be matched later
    - path in view -> if first property exists in model of viewmodel try to resolve the path down to the value
- observer mutations, find/create match, sync
    - remove mappings
- observe 
    - model: 
- match
    - if a new 

Kinds
- model, view model
    - attribute definition name -> label/text
    - (attribute definition  -> presentation)
    - attribute value -> value/label/text
    - attribute change -> value/label/text
- view
    - value change -> set attribute value
    - action -> 


Evaluate (restricted) a JS
Context Variables:
    - 'this' is the current HTML element the aurora attribute is bound to
    - '$' | '$model' is the model  (wish: all properties of the model are top level vars) 
    - '$meta' is the meta model
    - '$vm' | '$viewmodel' is the view model
    - '$viewmeta' is the meta view model
    - '$interface' | '$i' is are the properties from the app interface settings
Available globals:
    - 'app' is the app (if defined)
    - 'me' is the SSI
    - 'universe' | '$u' is are the properties from the universe
    - 'thoregon'
    - 'dorifer'
    - 'device'
    - 'mediathek'
    thoregon, mediathek, dorifer, puls -> available as globals
All evaluations will be reavaluated on every mutation of the model 
Arbitrary properties can be defined and accessed to use it for view control (aurora-data).  
Bind fn to the element (this)

View Context Variables
    - this is the element
    - $ref.<name>   
    Functions
    - $emit  emit an event with name and params   

- element attributes
    - aurora-name       (alpine -> x-model)
        bind property from model or the viewmodel (if not defined on the model) to the elements value or innerText. only property name of model or view model, no evaluate
        keep in sync with the specified property
        all names are relative path, start with 'root:' to use an absolute path. 
        long form aurora-name:model 
        - aurora-name:viewmodel | aurora-name:vm
            bind property from view model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - aurora-name:meta
            bind meta property from model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - aurora-name:viewmeta | aurora-name:vmeta
            bind meta property from view model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - .<eventname>  
            specify the 'change' event  
        - for 'input only' fields implement on the view model a get method which does not deliver anything  
    - aurora-bind:<attribute-name>    (alpine -> x-bind)
        <input aurora-bind:placeholder="$.extratext">
        bind an attribute e.g. class to a JS 
        - if the attribute-name is a function, it will be invoked with the value
        - if the attribute-name is a property of the element, it will be set
        - otherwise the element html-attribute will be set
        evaluates JS to get a value, value will be assigned to the element attribute
        bind shorthand -> :<attribute-name>
        bind w/o element attribute sets the 'innerText' of for input elements the 'value' property
        
        [todo] .once subselector defined this bind will only be evaluated once per view model (when the viewmodel is set or changed)
            take selector in account (model or viewmodel)
            !caution: first it may be evaluated when the is only the viewmodel, but not the model available
    - aurora-i18n
        get translation for token, replace 'innerText' or 'placeholder' if available
        aurora-i18n:<element-attribute>
    - aurora-show
        evaluates JS to get a value, if true element will be shown
    - aurora-enabled
        evaluates JS to get a value, if true element is enabled
    - aurora-action:<what>  (alpine -> x-on)
        will be fired on <what>: click (default), click, change, focus, blur ...
        --> see @open and @toggle at AuroraButton 
        evaluates JS to handle the event
        should hover, active also be supported?  
        action shorthand -> @<what>
    - aurora-mask
        define a mask for the input field e.g. phonenumber, IBAN, ...

    - aurora-transaction
        define a transaction context for the view
        implement on view model what to do at 'commit' e.g. sync/create model
        sync e.g. with an OK button
        if no tx -> immed update

    - aurora-intersect (later)
        - :enter, :leave 
        - .once, .half, .full, .when:<percentage>, 
        evaluates JS
    - aurora-data  (maybe later)
         define local variables as JSON with a default value, will be mapped to the view model if available
         <... aurora-data="{ myvar: 1 }">
    - aurora-if (later)
        evaluates JS to get a result, lazy init -> first add to dom only when true  (should remove from DOM?)
    - aurora-ifnot (later)
        evaluates JS to get a result, lazy init -> first add to dom only when false (should remove from DOM?)
    - aurora-ref (later)
        give elements a name to reference it elsewhere
    - aurora-watch:<name> (maybe later, implement in viewmodel)
        define a variable (like in aurora-name) to listen to. 
        execute a js from the attribute content
        
    all attributes can be abbreviated with a-<attrname>

    Views only
    - aurora-model
        inject another object as $ (model)
    
    Indicators
        specialized elements ->  AuroraValidationIndicator: redesign to pub/sub (see connectedCallback() MutationObserver) 
        'valid-state' event
        aurora-indicator attribute ?
        
    Component Behavior only:
    - aurora-trigger <name>
        can be used by the behavior implementation to react on a user click somewhere on the UI
        invokes a method on the behavior named 'trigger<name>' 


## Processing




## AuroraTemplate   
    
Validations & Indicators
========================

observer: keep sync

View
====

directly reference an entity

Commit message:

introduce 'set-parent-viewmodel' on embedded views, fixes

lib/viewmodel/spec.md, after:

Mutations
=========

match model - viewmodel - view  defs/attributes/events/actions/

- run over existing observable, find/create match, sync
    - matching for model and view model will be (very) lazy
        - just add listener for changes
        - wait for mach requests from the view 
    - if no match found, register it to be matched later
    - path in view -> if first property exists in model of viewmodel try to resolve the path down to the value
- observer mutations, find/create match, sync
    - remove mappings
- observe 
    - model: 
- match
    - if a new 

Kinds
- model, view model
    - attribute definition name -> label/text
    - (attribute definition  -> presentation)
    - attribute value -> value/label/text
    - attribute change -> value/label/text
- view
    - value change -> set attribute value
    - action -> 


Evaluate (restricted) a JS
Context Variables:
    - 'this' is the current HTML element the aurora attribute is bound to
    - '$' | '$model' is the model  (wish: all properties of the model are top level vars) 
    - '$meta' is the meta model
    - '$vm' | '$viewmodel' is the view model
    - '$viewmeta' is the meta view model
    - '$interface' | '$i' is are the properties from the app interface settings
Available globals:
    - 'app' is the app (if defined)
    - 'me' is the SSI
    - 'universe' | '$u' is are the properties from the universe
    - 'thoregon'
    - 'dorifer'
    - 'device'
    - 'mediathek'
    thoregon, mediathek, dorifer, puls -> available as globals
All evaluations will be reavaluated on every mutation of the model 
Arbitrary properties can be defined and accessed to use it for view control (aurora-data).  
Bind fn to the element (this)

View Context Variables
    - this is the element
    - $ref.<name>   
    Functions
    - $emit  emit an event with name and params   

- element attributes
    - aurora-name       (alpine -> x-model)
        bind property from model or the viewmodel (if not defined on the model) to the elements value or innerText. only property name of model or view model, no evaluate
        keep in sync with the specified property
        all names are relative path, start with 'root:' to use an absolute path. 
        long form aurora-name:model 
        - aurora-name:viewmodel | aurora-name:vm
            bind property from view model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - aurora-name:meta
            bind meta property from model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - aurora-name:viewmeta | aurora-name:vmeta
            bind meta property from view model to the elements value or innerText.only property name of meta model or meta view model, no evaluate
        - .<eventname>  
            specify the 'change' event  
        - for 'input only' fields implement on the view model a get method which does not deliver anything  
    - aurora-bind:<attribute-name>    (alpine -> x-bind)
        <input aurora-bind:placeholder="$.extratext">
        bind an attribute e.g. class to a JS 
        - if the attribute-name is a function, it will be invoked with the value
        - if the attribute-name is a property of the element, it will be set
        - otherwise the element html-attribute will be set
        evaluates JS to get a value, value will be assigned to the element attribute
        bind shorthand -> :<attribute-name>
        bind w/o element attribute sets the 'innerText' of for input elements the 'value' property
        
        [todo] .once subselector defined this bind will only be evaluated once per view model (when the viewmodel is set or changed)
            take selector in account (model or viewmodel)
            !caution: first it may be evaluated when the is only the viewmodel, but not the model available
    - aurora-i18n
        get translation for token, replace 'innerText' or 'placeholder' if available
        aurora-i18n:<element-attribute>
    - aurora-show
        evaluates JS to get a value, if true element will be shown
    - aurora-enabled
        evaluates JS to get a value, if true element is enabled
    - aurora-action:<what>  (alpine -> x-on)
        will be fired on <what>: click (default), click, change, focus, blur ...
        --> see @open and @toggle at AuroraButton 
        evaluates JS to handle the event
        should hover, active also be supported?  
        action shorthand -> @<what>
    - aurora-mask
        define a mask for the input field e.g. phonenumber, IBAN, ...

    - aurora-transaction
        define a transaction context for the view
        implement on view model what to do at 'commit' e.g. sync/create model
        sync e.g. with an OK button
        if no tx -> immed update

    - aurora-intersect (later)
        - :enter, :leave 
        - .once, .half, .full, .when:<percentage>, 
        evaluates JS
    - aurora-data  (maybe later)
         define local variables as JSON with a default value, will be mapped to the view model if available
         <... aurora-data="{ myvar: 1 }">
    - aurora-if (later)
        evaluates JS to get a result, lazy init -> first add to dom only when true  (should remove from DOM?)
    - aurora-ifnot (later)
        evaluates JS to get a result, lazy init -> first add to dom only when false (should remove from DOM?)
    - aurora-ref (later)
        give elements a name to reference it elsewhere
    - aurora-watch:<name> (maybe later, implement in viewmodel)
        define a variable (like in aurora-name) to listen to. 
        execute a js from the attribute content
        
    all attributes can be abbreviated with a-<attrname>

    Views only
    - aurora-model
        inject another object as $ (model)
    
    Indicators
        specialized elements ->  AuroraValidationIndicator: redesign to pub/sub (see connectedCallback() MutationObserver) 
        'valid-state' event
        aurora-indicator attribute ?
        
    Component Behavior only:
    - aurora-trigger <name>
        can be used by the behavior implementation to react on a user click somewhere on the UI
        invokes a method on the behavior named 'trigger<name>' 


## Processing


## Embedded View

- view model will get the parent model and view model

- model-property=<property-name>
    - model can be passed to the embedded view model by specifying
    - a '.' (dot) passes the current model


## AuroraTemplate   
    
Validations & Indicators
========================

observer: keep sync

View
====

directly reference an entity
